



[Illustration:

  THE KYLOE OX.
]




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  THE
                             LITTLE BOOK OF
                           BRITISH QUADRUPEDS






                               BY W. MAY.


[Illustration]


                                LONDON:
                         C. TILT, FLEET STREET.


------------------------------------------------------------------------






                      C. WHITTINGHAM, TOOKS COURT,

                             CHANCERY LANE.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CONTENTS.


                                             Page
                      The Kyloe Ox              7
                      The Horse                 8
                      The Race Horse           12
                      The Cart Horse           16
                      The Mule                 20
                      The Ass                  24
                      The Bull                 28
                      The Cow                  32
                      The Ram                  36
                      The Sheep                40
                      The Goat                 44
                      The Stag                 48
                      The Fallow Deer          52
                      The Roebuck              56
                      The Boar                 60
                      The Sow                  64
                      The Domestic Cat         68
                      The Wild Cat             72
                      The Weasel               76
                      The Martin               80
                      The Ferret               84
                      The Polecat              88
                      The Badger               92
                      The Fox                  96
                      The Wolf                100
                      The Shepherd’s Dog      104
                      The Bulldog             108
                      The Newfoundland dog    112
                      The Greyhound           116
                      The Foxhound            120
                      The Harrier             124
                      The Pointer             128
                      The Spaniel             132
                      The Terrier             136
                      The Hare                140
                      The Rabbit              144
                      The Squirrel            148
                      The Dormouse            152
                      The Rat                 156
                      The Water Rat           160
                      The Mouse               164
                      The Mole                168
                      The Hedgehog            172
                      The Bat                 176
                      The Guinea Pig          180
                      The Otter               184
                      The Ichneumon           188


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE KYLOE OX.


This most useful animal is a native of Scotland, and is said to have
derived its name from having crossed the kyles, or ferries, which abound
in the Highlands.


[Illustration]


The Kyloe Ox is of a black colour, and has a very thick hide, and a
great deal of hair. Its horns are large and long. Its flesh is the
finest kind of beef: and there is scarcely a single part of the Ox that
cannot be made use of. The hide is made into leather, the gristles are
made into glue, the horns into knife-handles, drinking-cups, &c. and the
bones are a substitute for ivory.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE HORSE.


This noble animal is found in almost every part of the world. In Arabia
and Africa are wild horses, which wander about in herds; and in South
America many thousands are seen in one drove.

The horse is used for riding, and is then guided by the rein. He is used
for drawing carriages, carts, and waggons, for ploughing, and also for
war. Hunting seems to be enjoyed as much by the horse as by his rider:
and in the race he shows great eagerness to be the foremost.


[Illustration:

  THE HORSE.
]


When kindly used, the horse is very fond both of his feeder and of his
rider. He has a very good memory. A gentleman once rode a young horse
thirty miles from his home to see his friend. The horse had never been
in that part of the country before, and the road was hard to find: after
asking the way of many persons whom he met, the gentleman at last got to
his friend’s house. Two years afterwards he had again to go the same
journey, and it became quite dark, long before he could get to the
place. “Well,” said he, “here I am, far from any house, and I know not
an inch of the road, and I can hardly see my horse’s head. I have heard
much of the memory of the horse; it is my only hope now, go on;” so
saying, he threw the reins on his horse’s neck, and in half an hour he
was safe at his friend’s gate.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE RACE HORSE.


The horse is found in high perfection in Arabia. To the people of that
country they are as dear as their own children; and by constantly living
in the same tent with their owner and his family, they become very
familiar and gentle. They are not used to the spur, but the least touch
with the foot sets them in motion. They form the principal riches of
many of the Arab tribes, who use them both for plunder and for the
chase.


[Illustration:

  THE RACE HORSE.
]


Of one of these people a touching story is told. The whole stock of a
poor Arabian of the desert was a mare, and he consented to sell her to a
French merchant for a very large sum of money. At length with only a
miserable rag to cover his body he brought his noble courser to the
house of the buyer. Having dismounted, he looked first at the gold and
then at the mare, and heaving a deep sigh, he exclaimed, “To whom is it
that I am going to give thee up? To Frenchmen, who will tie thee close,
who will beat thee, who will render thee miserable! Return with me my
beauty! my jewel! and rejoice the hearts of my children!” Having said
this he sprang on her back, and was out of sight in a moment. Still, for
a continuance of great exertion, the English Race Horse is said to be
superior to the Arabian, and for fleetness, he will yield to none. A
Race Horse will go at the rate of a mile in less than two minutes.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE CART HORSE.


[Illustration:

  THE CART HORSE.
]


Till of late years, Pack-Horses were employed in the northern parts of
England, to carry goods and parcels. In their journeys over barren
moors, they strictly observed the line of order and regularity they were
first taught to keep. The leading horse, always chosen for his
steadiness and sagacity, being furnished with bells, gave notice to the
rest, which followed the sound, though sometimes at a distance. Some
years ago, one of them who had been long used to follow his leader, was
from accident or fatigue, put into an inferior rank; when, as if
sensible of his disgrace, he by the greatest exertion recovered his
usual station, but on arriving at the inn-yard, he dropped down dead!

These horses are not now seen; the old English Road Horse is strong and
active, and capable of enduring great hardship; and though the form of
the common Cart Horse is heavy, and his motion slow, he is extremely
useful, and is employed in a great many ways. In London there have been
instances of a single horse drawing, for a short space, so great a
weight as three tons.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE MULE.


[Illustration:

  THE MULE.
]


The common Mule sometimes lives to the age of thirty years. It is very
useful in carrying burdens, particularly in very mountainous places,
where horses are not so sure-footed. People of the first quality in
Spain are drawn by Mules. Their going down the mountains of the Alps is
very wonderful. They place their fore feet as if they were stopping
themselves; they then put their hinder feet together, but a little
forward, as if they were about to lie down. In this way, having taken a
look over the road, they slide down with great swiftness. In the mean
time, all the rider has to do is, to keep himself fast on the saddle
without checking the rein; for the least motion is sufficient to
disorder the equal balance of the animal, in which case both would
certainly be dashed to pieces. In their swiftest motion, when they seem
to have lost all government of themselves, they follow exactly the
different windings of the road, as if they had settled in their minds
which way they were to go.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                THE ASS.


The Ass has to endure the hardest labour, and is contented with the
coarsest food. The statement that Asses are stubborn animals is not
true, it arises from ill usage, and not from any defect in their temper.


[Illustration:

  THE ASS.
]


An old man, who a few years ago sold vegetables in London, used in his
employment an Ass, which conveyed his baskets from door to door. He
frequently gave the poor creature a handful of hay, or a piece of coarse
bread, or some greens, by way of refreshment and reward. The old man had
no need of any stick for the animal, indeed he seldom had to lift up his
hand to drive it on. This kind treatment being one day observed, he was
asked whether his beast was not apt to be stubborn. “Ah! master (he
replied), it is of no use to be cruel; and as for stubbornness I cannot
complain, for he is ready to do any thing, and to go any where. I bred
him myself. He is sometimes skittish and playful, and once ran away from
me; there were then more than fifty people after him, attempting in vain
to stop him, yet after all he turned back of his own accord, and never
stopped till he ran his head kindly into my bosom.”


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE BULL.


The Bull equals the horse in size, though he is not quite so high; his
form is more bulky, and he is stronger made about the neck and head.


[Illustration:

  THE BULL.
]


Bull-baiting is a very cruel sport; this mode of killing Bulls is
derived from one kind of ancient hunting, very like the Spanish
bull-fights of the present day. On notice being given that a wild Bull
would be slain on a certain day, the inhabitants of the neighbourhood
assembled, sometimes to the number of a hundred horsemen, and four or
five hundred foot, all armed with guns or other weapons. Those on foot
stood upon the walls or got into trees, while the horsemen rode off a
Bull from the rest of the herd, until he stood at bay, when they
dismounted and fired. At some of these huntings twenty or thirty shots
have been fired before the animal was killed. This dangerous sport is
now but little practised. There is scarcely any part of the Ox that is
not of some use to mankind. Boxes, combs, knife-handles, and drinking
vessels, are made of the horns. Glue is made of the sinews, gristles,
and the finer pieces of cuttings and parings of the hides, boiled in
water till they become jelly-like, and the parts sufficiently dissolved,
and then dried. The bone is a cheap substitute, in many instances, for
ivory. And the thinnest of the calves-skins are made into vellum.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                THE COW.


[Illustration:

  THE COW.
]


The Cow is the most important animal of the farmer’s stock. Being
equally capable of enduring heat and cold. It is an inhabitant of the
frozen, as well as of the most scorching climates. There are a great
variety of kinds; and they are all of a very humble and gentle
disposition. The climate and pastures of Great Britain are well adapted
to the nature of this animal; and we are indebted to the variety and
abundance of our wholesome vegetables, for the number and excellence of
our cattle, which range over our hills, and enliven our plains—a source
of wealth and boast to this happy country. Not having the upper
fore-teeth, the Cow prefers the high and rich grass in pastures, to the
short and more delicate herbage generally selected by the horse. For
this reason, where the grass is rather high and flourishing in our
pastures than large and full, the Cow thrives well; and there is no part
of Europe in which this animal grows larger, gives more milk, or fattens
sooner. The quantity of milk given by Cows is various; some give only
about six quarts in a day, whilst others give from fifteen to twenty.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                THE RAM.


[Illustration:

  THE RAM.
]


Sheep are very useful animals: they are quiet and harmless. They tremble
at the voice of the shepherd, or at the barking of his dog; but, on the
great hills where they run about at liberty, away from the shepherd,
they shew more courage. Sometimes a Ram or Wether will boldly attack a
single dog, and often come off victorious; but when the danger is more
alarming, they collect the strength of the whole flock. On such
occasions they draw up in a complete body, placing the female and the
young in the middle, while the males take the foremost ranks, keeping
close by each other. Thus an armed front is formed on all sides that
cannot easily be attacked without danger of destruction to the dog. In
this manner they wait with firmness the approach of the enemy, nor does
their courage fail them in the moment of attack: for, when the dog
advances within a few yards of the line, the Rams dart upon him with
such force as to lay him dead at their feet, unless he save himself in
time by flight.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE SHEEP.


[Illustration:

  THE SHEEP.
]


Sheep supply us both with food and clothing: and the wool alone affords,
in some countries, an amazing source of industry and wealth. They are
harmless animals, and, in general, very shy and timid. The Sheep in the
high mountains of Wales are very wild, and do not collect into large
flocks, but graze in parties of from eight to a dozen. One is always
placed at a distance from the rest, to give notice of the approach of
danger. When he observes a stranger advancing, he allows him to approach
as near, perhaps, as eighty or a hundred yards, but keeps a watchful eye
upon his motions; if the stranger shows a design of coming closer, he
alarms the rest of the flock by a loud hiss or whistle, twice or thrice
repeated, when the whole party instantly scour away with great speed, to
the most inaccessible parts of the mountains. No country produces finer
Sheep than Great Britain. Of these the Sheep that are bred in
Lincolnshire and the northern parts, are the largest and bear the most
wool. In other parts of England they are generally smaller; and in the
mountainous parts of Wales and Scotland they are very small.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE GOAT.


[Illustration:

  THE GOAT.
]


Although very shy and timid in a wild state, goats are easily trained as
domestic animals, being very sensible of kind treatment. The disposition
of this creature is, however, extremely unsettled, as is shewn by the
irregularity of all his actions. He walks, stops short, runs, leaps,
approaches or retires, shews and conceals himself, or flies off, as if
induced by mere whim, and without any other cause than what arises from
the strange vivacity of his temper. Goats love to feed on the tops of
hills, and prefer the very elevated and rugged parts of mountains,
finding sufficient food in the most heathy and barren grounds. They are
so active as to leap with ease and the utmost security, among the most
dreadful precipices; and even when two of them are yoked together, they
will, as it were by mutual consent, take the most hazardous leaps
together, and exert their efforts in such a united manner as generally
to get through the danger unhurt. In mountainous countries they are of
great service to mankind; the flesh of the old ones being salted as
winter provision, and the milk being used in many places for making
cheese. These animals require but little care and attention, and easily
provide for themselves proper and sufficient food.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE STAG.


This is the most beautiful animal of the Deer kind. The elegance of his
form, the lightness of his motions, the flexibility of his limbs, his
bold branching horns, which are yearly renewed, his grandeur, strength
and swiftness, give him a decided rank over every other inhabitant of
the forest. The age of the Stag is known by its horns: he begins to shed
them about the end of February or the beginning of March: each year they
become larger.


[Illustration:

  THE STAG.
]


The usual colour of the Stag, in England, is red; in other countries it
is commonly brown or yellow. His eye is extremely beautiful, soft and
sparkling: his hearing is quick; and his sense of smell very strong.
When listening, he raises his head, erects his ears, and seems attentive
to every noise, which he can hear at a great distance. When he
approaches a thicket, he stops to look round him on all sides; if he
perceives nothing to alarm him, he moves slowly forward; but on the
least appearance of danger, he flies off with the rapidity of the wind.
He appears to listen with great delight to the sound of the shepherd’s
pipe, which is sometimes made use of to ensnare him to his destruction.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE FALLOW DEER.


These animals live together in herds, which sometimes divide into two
parties, and maintain obstinate battles for the possession of a
favourite part of the park: each one having its leader, which is always
the oldest and strongest of the flock. They attack in regular order of
battle; they fight with courage, and mutually defend each other.


[Illustration:

  THE FALLOW DEER.
]


The chief difference between the Stag and the Fallow deer, seems to be
in the size and form of their horns; the latter are much smaller than
those of the former. The Fallow deer is easily tamed, feeds on a variety
of things which the stag refuses, and preserves its condition nearly the
same throughout the year, although its flesh, called venison, is
considered much finer at particular seasons. We have in England two
varieties of the Fallow deer, which are said to be of foreign origin:
the beautiful spotted kind were brought from Bengal in India. These
animals, with some variation, are found in almost every country of
Europe. Those of Spain are as large as stags, but darker; their necks
are also more slender; and their tails, which are longer than those of
ours, are black above, and white beneath.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE ROEBUCK.


The form of the Roebuck is elegant, and its motions light and easy. It
bounds seemingly without much effort, and runs with great swiftness.
When hunted, it tries to evade its pursuers by the most curious methods:
it often returns upon its former steps, till, by various windings, it
entirely misleads the hounds. This cunning animal then, by a sudden
spring, bounds to one side; and, lying close down upon its belly, lets
the hounds pass by, without offering to stir.


[Illustration:

  THE ROEBUCK.
]


The Roe was at one time common in many parts of England and Wales; but
at present it is to be found only in the Highlands of Scotland. It is
the smallest of all the Deer kind, being only three feet four inches
long, and rather more than two feet in height: the horns are from eight
to nine inches long, upright, round, and divided into three branches;
the body is covered with long hair. When the female has young, and they
are in danger, she hides them in a thicket; and, to preserve them,
offers herself to be chased. Numbers of fawns are taken alive from their
dams by the peasants, and many are worried by dogs, foxes, and other
enemies; so that the beautiful Roe is becoming daily more scarce.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE COMMON BOAR.


The Boar is naturally stupid, inactive, and drowsy. It is very restless
at a change of the weather: and during high winds it runs about with
great violence, screaming loudly at the same time. It is thought to
foresee the approach of bad weather. Before a storm comes on it may be
seen carrying straw to its sty, for the purpose of making itself a bed.


[Illustration:

  THE BOAR.
]


The form of the Boar is very clumsy. Its neck is strong, its snout is
long and hard, and made for turning up the earth for roots of various
kinds, of which it is very fond. It has likewise a quick sense of
smelling. The flesh of the Hog is of great use, and makes an elegant, as
well as almost a constant article for the table. It takes salt better
than any other kind of meat, and can be kept longer. It is of great
importance in ships’ stores, as it forms the principal food during long
voyages.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                THE SOW.


[Illustration:

  THE SOW.
]


The Sow is, generally speaking, a harmless and inoffensive creature. Its
food consists of a variety of things that would otherwise be wasted; the
refuse of the field, the garden, the barn, or the kitchen, afford them a
very good meal. These animals select with great sagacity and niceness
the plants they prefer, and are never poisoned like some others by
mistaking one plant for another. Selfish, obstinate, and greedy as many
think them, no animal, it is said, has greater feeling for those of its
own kind. They have been known to gather round a dog that teased them,
and kill him on the spot. If a male and female are put in a sty together
when young, the female will not eat her food for some time if her
companion is removed from her.

Many things shew that they are not quite so stupid as some are inclined
to believe. We have had exhibitions of their ingenuity, which have
attracted great attention and astonishment. And it is stated as a
remarkable fact, that a gamekeeper actually broke in a New Forest Sow to
find game nearly as well as a pointer.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE TAME CAT.


The Tame Cat may be found in almost all countries, and it differs but
little from the wild cat except in the brightness of its colours. It is
very useful in our houses in catching the rats and mice.


[Illustration:

  THE TAME CAT.
]


Of all animals when young, there is none more prettily playful and
amusing than the Kitten, and little children are mostly very fond of
them; but it generally changes its disposition as it grows older. From
being naturally ravenous, it learns in time to disguise its appetite,
and to seize the favourable moment for plunder. Sly and artful, it has
learned to conceal its intentions till it can put them in force: and
whenever the opportunity occurs, it directly seizes upon whatever it
finds, flies off with it, and remains at a distance till it thinks its
offence is forgotten. Instances of the fidelity of Cats, however, are
not so rare as some would have us imagine. A French traveller had an
Angora Cat, a native of Egypt, which kept by his side in his solitary
moments; she often interrupted him in his meditations by affectionate
caresses, and in his absence sought and called for him with great
inquietude.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE WILD CAT.


[Illustration:

  THE WILD CAT.
]


The hair of the Wild Cat is soft and fine, and of a pale yellow colour,
mixed with grey; a dusky-coloured line runs along the back, from its
head to its tail; the tail is thick, and marked with bars of black and
white. It is larger and stronger than the tame Cat, and its fur much
longer. It inhabits the most hilly and woody parts of this island, lives
in trees, and hunts for birds and small animals, such as rabbits, hares,
rats, mice, moles, &c.; and it is also very destructive among poultry.
The Cat seems to possess something like an additional sense, by means of
its whiskers. These whiskers consist not only of long hairs on the upper
lips, but also of four or five others standing up from each eyebrow, and
also two or three on each cheek; all of which, when the animal erects
them, make, with their extremities, so many points in the compass of a
circle as to be at least equal in extent to their own bodies. With this
assistance, it is supposed it can at once discover whether any hole or
space is large enough to admit the body, which to those living in a wild
state is of the greatest consequence; and to the domestic Cat of great
service.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE WEASEL.


The length of this animal does not exceed seven inches: its height is
two inches and a half. The most usual colour of the Weasel is a pale
reddish brown on the back, sides, and legs; the throat and belly are
white. This animal is very common, and well known in this country; it is
destructive to young birds, poultry, and rabbits, and is a keen devourer
of eggs. It will follow a young hare, which becomes so terrified as to
give itself up to it without resistance, making at the same time the
most piteous outcries.


[Illustration:

  THE WEASEL.
]


The Weasel is very useful to the farmer. During the winter it frequents
his barns and granaries, which it clears of rats and mice; it is a more
deadly enemy to them than even the Cat; for being more active and
slender it pursues them into their holes, and kills them quickly. Though
the Weasel is a wild little animal, there are instances to prove, that
it is capable of being made quite tame. They have been taught to lick
the hand from which they receive their food, and even to follow their
master.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE MARTIN.


[Illustration:

  THE MARTIN.
]


The Martin lives chiefly in the pine-tree forests of North America. The
principal difference between the Pine-Weasel and the Martin is in the
colour. The breast of the former is yellow; the colour of the body much
darker; and the fur in general, greatly superior in fineness, beauty,
and value. The Martin is about eighteen inches long; the tail is ten
inches long, and full of hair, especially towards the end, which is
thick and bushy; the ears are broad, round and open; the body is covered
with a thick fur, of a dark brown colour: the head is brown, mixed with
red; the throat and breast are white; the feet are broad, and covered on
the under side with a thick fur; the claws are white, large, and sharp,
well adapted for climbing trees, where it mostly lives. The skin has a
very nice scent; its fur is valuable, and highly prized. When taken
young, it is easily tamed, and becomes very playful and good-humoured,
but is not to be depended upon. It readily takes advantage of the first
opportunity to regain its liberty, and retire to the woods. The food of
the Martin consists of rats, mice, poultry, game, birds, and grain, and
it is also extremely fond of honey.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE FERRET.


[Illustration:

  THE FERRET.
]


This little creature is a native of Africa, and is only known to us in a
domestic state. It is unable to bear a cold climate, and cannot live
without great care and shelter. It is usually kept in a box, with wool,
of which it makes itself a warm bed. It sleeps a great part of the day;
and the moment it awakes, it seems eager for its food, which is commonly
bread and milk. The length of the Ferret is about fourteen inches; the
tail is five inches long; its nose is sharper than that of the Weasel,
its ears are round, and its eyes red and fiery: the colour of the whole
body is a very pale yellow. When employed to clear the rabbit warren, it
must be muzzled, that it may not kill the rabbits in their holes, but
only oblige them to come out, that the warrener may catch them in his
nets. If the Ferret be suffered to go in without a muzzle, or should
free himself from it whilst in the hole, there is great danger of losing
it: for, after satisfying itself with blood, it falls asleep, and it is
then almost impossible to get at it. The most usual method is by digging
it out, or smoking the hole. If these do not succeed, it continues
during the summer among the rabbit holes, and lives upon the prey it
finds there; but is sure to perish in the winter.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE POLECAT.


[Illustration:

  THE POLECAT.
]


The Polecat is not afraid of mankind, but approaches our dwellings with
confidence, mounts to their roofs, and often lives in barns, hay-lofts,
or other places that are much frequented. From thence he prowls about
under the shadow of night, to attack the poultry. He is very active, and
runs fast. While running, his belly seems to touch the ground; but in
preparing to jump, he arches his back very much, by means of which the
force of his spring is greatly increased. The Polecat, during summer,
lives in woods, or about rabbit-warrens. Here, if he cannot find a hole
ready made that suits him, he forms a retreat for himself, in the
ground, about two yards in length, which he contrives, if he can, to end
among the roots of some large tree. From thence he often comes forth and
destroys game and rabbits. These animals are also very fond of honey;
and in winter when the bees are weakened by the coldness of the season,
they have been known to attack the hives and to devour their contents
very eagerly.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE BADGER.


[Illustration:

  THE BADGER.
]


This animal is a native of Europe, but is known to live in warm
countries. It is found, without any variety, in Spain, France, Italy,
Germany, Britain, Poland, and Sweden. The usual length of the Badger is
somewhat above two feet, and the tail is about six inches long; its eyes
are small, and are placed in a black stripe which begins behind the
ears, and runs towards the nose; the throat and legs are black; the
back, sides, and tail, are of a dirty grey, mixed with black; the legs
and feet are very short, strong, and thick; each foot has five toes;
those on the fore feet are armed with strong claws, well adapted for
digging.

Although furnished with powerful weapons of offence, and having besides
strength to use them with great effect, it is very harmless and
inoffensive; and unless attacked, employs them only for its support. The
Badger retires to the most secret places, where it digs its hole, and
forms its dwelling under ground. Its food consists chiefly of roots,
fruits, grass, insects, and frogs. Few creatures defend themselves
better, or bite with greater keenness, than the Badger. On that account
it has been often baited with dogs trained for the purpose; but,
happily, little is now heard of this very cruel sport. The Badger is a
very sleepy animal. It keeps its hole during the day, and feeds only in
the night.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                THE FOX.


[Illustration:

  THE FOX.
]


The Fox is a native of almost every quarter of the globe; and is of so
wild and savage a nature that it is said to be impossible fully to tame
him: when partially so, he is very playful; but will on the least
offence, bite those with whom he is most familiar. He possesses more
cunning than any other beast of prey. This quality he shows in his mode
of providing for himself a place of security, where he retires from
pressing dangers, and brings up his young; and his craftiness is also
discovered by his schemes to catch lambs, geese, hens, and all kinds of
small birds.

When he can conveniently do so, the Fox fixes his abode on the border of
a wood, in the neighbourhood of some farm or village. He listens to the
crowing of the cocks, or the cries of the poultry. He scents them at a
distance; he chooses his time with judgment; and conceals his road, as
well as his design. He slips forward with caution, sometimes even
trailing his body; and seldom misses his booty. If he can leap the wall,
or creep in beneath the gate, he ravages the court-yard, puts all to
death, and retires with his prey. He hunts the young hares in the
plains; and seizes the old ones in their seats. The eye of the Fox is of
a lively hazel colour, and very expressive.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE WOLF.


These animals are natives of almost all the temperate and cold countries
of the globe; and were formerly so numerous in this island, that King
Edgar, about a thousand years ago, changed the punishments for some
offences, into a demand of a certain number of Wolves’ tongues from each
criminal; and once converted a heavy and oppressive tax on one of the
Welsh princes, into a yearly tribute of three hundred Wolves’ heads.
Some hundred years after, these animals increased to such a degree, that
great rewards were given for destroying them.


[Illustration:

  THE WOLF.
]


The Wolf is very savage indeed when it is hungry. It then braves every
danger, and even attacks those animals that are protected by man. Man
himself, upon these occasions, frequently falls a victim to its power;
and it is said, that when Wolves have once tasted human blood, they
always give it the preference. The Wolf has great strength, especially
in the muscles of his neck and jaw: he can carry a sheep in his mouth,
and easily run off with it in that manner. His bite is cruel and deadly,
and keener as it meets with no opposition: but when opposed, he is
cautious and careful, and seldom fights but from necessity. Sometimes
whole droves of them join in the cruel work of destruction.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          THE SHEPHERD’S DOG.


[Illustration:

  THE SHEPHERD’S DOG.
]


This useful animal, ever faithful to his charge, reigns at the head of
the flock, where he is better heard, and more attended to, than even the
Shepherd himself. In the few remaining large tracts of land which are
appropriated to the feeding of Sheep, this dog is of the utmost
importance. Large flocks range over extensive tracts of land, seemingly
without controul: their only guide being the Shepherd, attended by his
Dog, the constant companion of his toil. It receives his commands, and
is always prompt to execute them; it is the watchful guardian of the
flock, prevents straying, keeps them together, and conducts them from
one pasture to another: it will not suffer strange sheep to mix with
them, but carefully keeps off every intruder. In driving a number of
sheep to any distant part, a well-trained Dog never fails to confine
them to the road; he watches every avenue that leads from it, where he
takes his stand, to prevent them from going out of the way. He pursues
the stragglers if any escape, and forces them into order, without doing
them the least injury. If the Shepherd be at any time absent he depends
upon his Dog to keep them together; and as soon as he gives the
well-known signal, this faithful creature conducts them to his master,
though at a great distance.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE BULLDOG.


[Illustration:

  THE BULLDOG.
]


When little children meet any dogs they should take care not to tease
them, more particularly the Bulldog, for when that dog is completely
roused it is the fiercest of its kind, and is probably the most
courageous creature in the world. It is low in stature, but very strong.
Its nose is short; and the under jaw projects beyond the upper, which
makes it look very fierce. Its courage in attacking the bull is well
known; its fury in seizing and its obstinacy in keeping its hold, are
truly astonishing. It always aims at the front, and generally fastens
upon the lip, the tongue, the eye, or some part of the face; where it
hangs in spite of every effort of the bull to get away from it.

Many stories are told us of this most cruel sport; but of late years the
inhuman custom of baiting the bull has been almost entirely laid aside,
and there are now few Dogs of this kind to be seen. The great danger of
the Bulldog is, he always makes his attack without barking.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         THE NEWFOUNDLAND DOG.


This breed of Dogs was originally brought from the country of which they
bear the name, where their great strength and sagacity render them
extremely useful to the settlers on those coasts, who use them in
bringing down wood from the forests to the sea side. Three or four of
them yoked to a sledge, will draw two or three hundred weight of wood
piled upon it, for several miles, with great ease: they are not attended
by a driver, nor any person to guide them; but after having delivered
their loading, they return immediately to the woods, where they are
accustomed to be fed.


[Illustration:

  THE NEWFOUNDLAND DOG.
]


During a severe storm in the winter of 1789, a ship, belonging to
Newcastle, was lost near Yarmouth; and a Newfoundland Dog alone escaped
to the shore, bringing in his mouth the captain’s pocket-book. He landed
amidst a number of people, several of whom tried in vain to take it from
him. The sagacious animal, as if sensible of the importance of the
charge which in all probability was delivered to him by his perishing
master, at length leapt fawningly against the breast of a man, who had
attracted his notice among the crowd, and delivered the book to him. The
Dog immediately returned to the place where he had landed, and watched
with great attention every thing that came from the wrecked vessel, and
tried to bring it to shore.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE GREYHOUND.


[Illustration:

  THE GREYHOUND.
]


The Greyhound is the fleetest of all dogs, and can outrun every animal
of the chase; but as it wants the faculty of scenting, it follows only
by the eye. It was formerly held in such estimation, as to be considered
the peculiar companion of gentlemen; and by the forest laws of King
Canute, about a thousand years ago, it was enacted, that no person under
that degree should presume to keep a Greyhound. It was supposed to be
the Irish Greyhound, rendered thinner and more delicate by the
difference of climate and of culture. The Irish Greyhound is the largest
of the dog kind, and its appearance the most beautiful and majestic. It
is only to be found in Ireland, where it was formerly of great use in
clearing the country of wolves. It is now extremely rare, and is kept
more for show than for use, being equally unserviceable for hunting the
stag, the fox, or the hare. These dogs are about three feet high,
generally of a white or cinnamon colour, and in make resemble a
Greyhound. Their aspect is mild, their disposition gentle and peaceable,
and their strength so great, that in combat the mastiff or bulldog is
far from being equal to them. They commonly seize their antagonists by
the back, and shake them to death, which their great size generally
enables them to do with ease.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE FOXHOUND.


[Illustration:

  THE FOXHOUND.
]


The Foxhounds generally preferred are tall, light-made, but strong, and
possessed of great courage, speed, and activity. No country in Europe
can boast of Dogs of this kind, of equal swiftness, strength, or
agility, to those of Great Britain, where the utmost attention is paid
to their training. The climate also seems congenial to their nature; for
it has been said that when Hounds of English breed have been sent into
France, or other countries, they in some degree lose those admirable
qualities for which they were once so remarkable. In England attachment
to the chase has been considered a trait in the national character; from
the care and attention which have been given to the rearing of Dogs and
Horses, it is no matter of surprise that this country should excel all
others in that diversion.

Many years since a very large stag was turned out of Wingfield Park, in
the county of Westmorland, and was pursued by the Hounds, till, by
fatigue or accident the whole pack was thrown out, except two favourite
Dogs which continued the chase the greater part of the day. The stag
returned to the park from whence he set out; and, as his last effort,
leapt the wall, and immediately expired. One of the Hounds pursued him
thither; but, being unable to get over, laid down and died: the other
dog was found dead at a little distance.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE HARRIER.


[Illustration:

  THE HARRIER.
]


These Dogs are kept for the business of the chase. They pursue the hare
with the greatest eagerness, hardly giving her time to breathe. The most
eager sportsmen find it sufficient exercise to keep in with their speed.
There is a kind of Dog between this and the large Terrier, which forms a
strong, active, and hardy Hound, used in hunting the otter. It is rough,
wire-haired, thick-quartered, long-eared, and thin-shouldered. There is
reason to suppose, that the Beagle and the Harrier must have been
introduced into Great Britain after the Romans became masters of the
island a thousand years ago, as, before that time the Britons were
occupied in clearing their extensive forests of the various wild beasts,
such as wild boars, bears and wolves, with which they then abounded; and
for that purpose larger and stronger dogs than the Harrier or the Beagle
would be required.

In the New Forest, in 1810, a person, in getting over a stile observed
there was blood upon it; he knew that deer had been killed, and sheep
stolen. He obtained a bloodhound. The dog being brought to the spot and
led to the scent followed in it, and at length came to a heap of furze,
belonging to a cottager. The woman of the house attempted to drive away
the dog, but was prevented. On removing the faggots a hole was found
containing the body of a sheep and a quantity of salted meat.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE POINTER.


[Illustration:

  THE POINTER.
]


This dog is highly esteemed for its use in the pursuit of game. It is
remarkable for the quickness with which it receives instruction. It may
be said to be almost self-taught; whilst the old English dog requires
the greatest care and attention in breaking and training to the sport.
The Spanish Pointer, however, is not so durable and hardy, nor so able
to undergo the fatigues of an extensive sport. It is chiefly employed in
finding partridges, and pheasants, either for the gun or the net. It is
said that an English nobleman, Robert Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, in
the days of King Edward VI. was the first who broke a setting-dog to the
net. We are often astonished at the senses of the higher quadrupeds,
such as the dog and the horse, by which man employs them for his use.
The senses most called into action in the dog are those of smell and
hearing. Accordingly the fox-hound can tell the scent of the fox he is
pursuing from one that may cross his path; the spaniel or terrier will
track his master by his scent through a crowded city; the watch-dog
barks when no one else hears a foot fall. This is partly natural and
partly attained by exercise and attention.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE SPANIEL.


[Illustration:

  THE SPANIEL.
]


This kind of dog is of great value, from the readiness with which it
receives instruction, the quickness with which it obeys commands, and
its great docility and strong attachment to its master. Of this one
striking proof may be given. Old Daniel, the gamekeeper to the Rev. Mr.
Corsellis, had reared a Spaniel named Dash, which became his constant
attendant both by night and day. Wherever the gamekeeper appeared, Dash
was never far distant. When the gamekeeper died, little Dash would not
quit the body, but laid upon the bed by its side. After his master was
buried, this faithful dog would frequently visit the room where he
breathed his last, and would remain there for hours. From thence, for
fourteen days he constantly visited the grave, at the end of which time
he died.

Perhaps the most remarkable instance of attachment is that of the little
dog who crept within the clothes of Mary Queen of Scots just previous to
her execution, and could not afterward be separated from the corpse but
by force.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE TERRIER.


The Terrier is a very hardy dog, and is of much service to us, as he is
an exceeding great enemy to rats and most other vermin: he has very
great courage, and will even attack the badger, nor does he seem to care
for the desperate wounds he often receives when fighting with it. He is
more particularly useful, on account of having such a very acute scent.


[Illustration:

  THE TERRIER.
]


There are two varieties of this dog, the one has got very short legs, a
long back, and is commonly of a black or yellowish colour mingled with
white; the other is of a more sprightly appearance, with a much shorter
body, and the colour of this species is a reddish-brown or black.

When gentlemen go out a hunting, they generally take one of these dogs
to accompany their hounds, for they are very expert in forcing foxes and
other game from their coverts; and their scent being so very quick, they
often cause a great deal of amusement.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE HARE.


[Illustration]


This animal not possessing any means of self defence is furnished by
Providence with a high degree of fear. It is attentive to every alarm,
and is furnished with very long ears, which are tube-like, and catch the
most remote sounds. The eyes are so prominent, as to enable the animal
to see both before and behind. The Hare feeds in the evening, and sleeps
during the day, and, as he mostly lies on the ground, he has the feet
protected, both above and below, with a thick covering of hair. In a
moonlight evening many of these creatures may sometimes be seen starting
together, leaping about and pursuing each other; but the least noise
alarms them, and they then scamper off each in a different direction.
Their pace is a kind of gallop, or quick succession of leaps; and they
are very swift, particularly in ascending hills. In winter they
generally choose a form exposed to the south, and in summer they change
this for one looking to the north: in both cases, they have the instinct
of commonly fixing on a place where the objects around them are nearly
of the colour of their bodies.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE RABBIT.


[Illustration:

  THE RABBIT.
]


The Rabbit abounds in Great Britain, where its skin forms a very
considerable article in the manufactory of hats. Although the Hare and
the Rabbit are so like each other, nature has placed a strong barrier
between them, in their feeling of mutual aversion. Besides this, there
is a wide difference in their habits and pursuits: the rabbit lives in
holes in the earth, where it brings forth its young, and retires from
the approach of danger; whilst the Hare prefers the open fields, and
trusts to its speed for safety. The female makes a bed of down for her
young, which she pulls off her own coat. She never leaves them, but when
pressed with hunger, and returns as soon as that is supplied. During the
time she tends them, she carefully conceals them from the male, lest he
should devour them; and often covers up the mouth of the hole, that her
retreat may not be discovered. The tame Rabbit is of various colours,
and is somewhat larger than the wild Rabbit; but its flesh is not so
good, being softer and more insipid. Its food is generally cabbage
leaves, colewort, blades of corn, sourdock, and other moist plants; but
sweet short hay, and a little clean oats, make the best diet.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE SQUIRREL.


[Illustration:

  THE SQUIRREL.
]


This beautiful little creature is of a bright brown colour, inclined to
red; the breast and belly are white; the ears are ornamented with long
tufts of hair; the eyes are large, black, and lively; the fore teeth
strong and sharp; and the fore legs are curiously furnished with long
stiff hairs, which project on each side like whiskers. When it eats, it
sits upright, and uses its fore feet as hands to convey food to its
mouth. It is equally admired for its neatness and elegance of form, as
for its liveliness and activity. Its disposition is gentle and harmless.
Though naturally wild, and very timid, it is easily taught to receive
with freedom the most familiar caresses from the hand that feeds it. It
usually lives in woods, and makes its nest of moss or dry leaves in the
hollow of trees. It seldom descends upon the ground, but leaps from tree
to tree with great agility. Its food consists of fruits, almonds, nuts,
and acorns; of which it collects great stores for winter provision, and
secures them carefully near its nest. In the summer it feeds on buds and
young shoots, and is very fond of the cones or apples of the fur and
pine trees. The tail of the Squirrel is its greatest ornament, and
serves as a defence from the cold, being large enough to cover the whole
body; it likewise assists it in leaping from one tree to another.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE DORMOUSE.


This animal is very much like the common mouse. Its colour is a tawny
red, the throat white, the tail tufted. When it is thirsty it does not
lap, but dips its fore feet, with the toes bent, into the water, and
drinks from them. In the summer this curious little creature is very
industrious, laying up its provision for the winter, which consists of
nuts, beans, and acorns. As soon as the cold weather approaches, it
rolls itself up into a ball, with its tail curled over its head between
its ears, and continues in that state till the warm weather comes again.


[Illustration:

  THE DORMOUSE.
]


Dormice build their nests either in the hollows of trees, or near the
bottom of thick shrubs, and line them with moss, soft birchens, and
dried leaves. Conscious of the length of time they have to pass in their
solitary cells, they are very choice of the materials they make use of.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                THE RAT.


[Illustration:

  THE RAT.
]


There are two kinds known in this country—the Black Rat, which was
formerly universal, but is now very rarely seen, having been almost all
destroyed by the large brown kind, generally distinguished by the name
of the Norway Rat. This formidable invader is now found throughout the
country, from whence every method has been tried in vain to expel it. It
is about nine inches long; of a light brown colour, the throat and under
part of a dirty white inclining to grey; its feet are naked, and of a
pale flesh colour; and the tail is as long as the body. It is a very
bold little animal, and when closely pursued, will turn and fasten on
its assailant. Its bite is keen, and the wound it inflicts is painful,
and difficult to heal, owing to the form of its teeth, which are long,
sharp, and irregular. It is a very singular fact in the history of these
animals, that the skins of such as have been devoured in their holes,
(and they frequently feed upon each other,) have been found curiously
turned inside out; every part being completely turned, even to the ends
of the toes. How the operation is performed, it would be difficult to
discover; but it appears to be effected by some peculiar mode of eating
out the contents. Besides the numbers that perish in this unnatural way,
they have many fierce and terrible enemies that take every opportunity
to destroy them.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE WATER RAT.


[Illustration:

  THE WATER RAT.
]


The Water Rat is somewhat smaller than the common brown Rat; its head
and nose are thicker; its eyes are small; its ears short, scarcely
appearing through the hair; its teeth are large, strong and yellow. In
an old one, the lower front teeth measure somewhat more than half an
inch in length. The hair on its head and body is thicker and longer than
that of the common Rat, and chiefly of a dark brown colour, mixed with
red; the belly is grey; the tail five inches long, covered with short
black hairs, and the tip of the tail is white. The Water Rat generally
frequents the sides of rivers, ponds, and ditches, where it burrows, and
forms its nest. It feeds on frogs, small fish, and spawn; swims and
dives remarkably fast; and can continue a long time under water.

The Musk Rat somewhat resembles the one just described. The eyes are
large; the ears short, rounded, and covered both inside and outside with
hair. Its fur is soft, glossy, and of a reddish-brown colour; and
beneath this is a much finer fur or thick down, which is very useful in
the manufacture of hats. The tail is flattened and covered with scales.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE MOUSE.


[Illustration:

  THE MOUSE.
]


This little creature we all know, because it eats our cheese, and tries
all the good things in the larder, we keep a cat to catch it: yet it is
very pretty. It hides itself in the walls and under the floors; and in
these places it sometimes lays up a considerable store of provision for
future subsistence. Its food is various; and, as it is able to pass
through a very small hole, there are few places secure from its
approach. It seems a constant attendant on man, and is to be found only
near his dwelling. Its sight and hearing are extremely acute: and as
soon as it observes the least motion, or hears the slightest noise, it
listens attentively, sitting erect on its hinder feet; and, if the alarm
continues, it runs in haste to its retreat. But if it be gradually
encouraged, and nourishment and security are offered, it will, by
degrees, lose those fears. An instance is related of a Mouse that made
its appearance every day at the table of its benefactor, and there
waited until it had received its usual portion of food, which it
devoured, and then ran away. Some few of this species are of a pure
white colour; but whether they be a permanent kind, or only an
accidental variety, cannot well be determined.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE MOLE.


[Illustration:

  THE MOLE.
]


This animal is mostly found in grounds where the soil is loose and soft,
and affords the greatest quantity of worms and insects, on which it
feeds. Destined to seek its food under the surface of the earth, it is
wonderfully adapted by the all-wise Author of Nature, to its peculiar
mode of living. It enjoys the sense of hearing and smelling in a very
eminent degree: but is almost void of sight. To an animal of such
habits, a larger degree of sight would be attended with great
inconvenience, as well as be liable to continual injuries. Its eyes are
extremely small, and completely hid in the fur. The form of this
creature’s body, and particularly the construction of its fore feet, are
admirably adapted to the purpose of making its way in the earth, which
it does with wonderful ease: these feet are quite naked, very broad,
with large palms, almost like a hand: there are five toes on each, with
strong nails at the end. The hind feet are very small, with five slender
toes and a small thumb on the inside. Whenever surprised on the surface
of the ground, the mole disappears in an instant.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE HEDGEHOG.


[Illustration:

  THE HEDGEHOG.
]


The Hedgehog generally resides in small thickets and hedges; lives on
fruits, worms, beetles, and all kinds of insects; it conceals itself in
the day, and feeds only during the night. This animal is provided by
nature with a prickly armour, which defends it from the attacks of all
the smaller beasts of prey. When alarmed, it immediately collects itself
into the form of a ball, and presents on all sides a surface covered
with sharp points, which few animals are hardy enough to engage. The
more it is harassed, the closer it rolls itself. There are few dogs that
will venture to attack the Hedgehog. This little animal has been so far
domesticated as to learn to turn a spit by means of a small wheel in
which it is placed; it likewise answered to its name. In the winter, it
wraps itself up in a warm nest, made of moss, dried grass, and leaves;
and sleeps out the greater part of that season. It is frequently found
so completely encircled with herbage that it resembles a ball of dried
leaves.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                THE BAT.


This curious animal appears at first sight to be a bird, but it has
nothing in common with them, but the power of raising itself into the
air. The common species of this animal is about the size of a mouse, or
nearly two inches and a half in length: the wings are in fact an
extension of the skin all round the body; it is stretched on every side
when the animal flies, by the four inner toes of the fore feet, which
are very long.


[Illustration:

  THE BAT.
]


The body of the Bat is covered with a short fur, of a mouse colour,
tinged with red; the eyes are very small, and the ears like those of a
mouse.

The Bat appears early in the summer, and begins its flight towards
evening. It feeds upon gnats, moths, and almost all insects. This animal
sleeps away the greater part of its time, never venturing abroad by
day-light, nor yet in wet weather.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE GUINEA PIG.


[Illustration:

  THE GUINEA PIG.
]


This curious little animal, which is sometimes called the Restless Cavy,
is a native of Brazil, but many of them are kept in a domestic state in
various countries. It is of the rabbit kind, and resembles that animal
very much in its appearance and habits. It is not quite so large as the
rabbit, and is marked with white, black, and orange colours. It has not
got any tail, which makes it look very curious. It is a very neat
animal, and spends much of its time in cleaning the fur of its
companions. It never seems to form any attachment, and will suffer its
young to be taken away and destroyed, without making any resistance. If
any of their young ones chance to get dirtied the female takes such a
dislike to them, that she will never let them come near her again.

Guinea Pigs will sometimes scratch and kick each other till they are
covered with blood.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               THE OTTER.


[Illustration:

  THE OTTER.
]


These animals are, in general, rather more than three feet long from the
point of their nose to the tip of their tail. Their legs are very short,
but they are strong and muscular. The colour of their body is mostly of
a deep brown.

Otters live chiefly on the banks of rivers or brooks. They make the
entrance to their burrows under water, and work upwards, forming several
lodges, that they may have a retreat in case of high floods; they end by
making a small hole for the purpose of admitting air, but they take care
that this hole shall come out in the midst of some thick bush, so that
they may not be discovered. They are easily tamed, and are kept by many
fishermen, being found of great service. The fishermen send them into
the water, and they will often drive the fish into their nets, and
sometimes bring out the larger ones in their mouths.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE ICHNEUMON.


This curious little animal is a native of Egypt, Barbary, and the Cape
of Good Hope. It is, in general, about the size of a common cat, but
rather longer in its body, and shorter in its legs. Its colour is a pale
reddish grey. It is sometimes streaked with a variety of colours, in the
same manner as a domestic cat. While eating, it sits upright, and uses
its fore feet like hands.


[Illustration:

  THE ICHNEUMON.
]


This animal is the boldest and most useful of the weasel kind. It is of
very great service in Egypt, and indeed is almost worshipped there, for
it destroys a great quantity of the eggs of the crocodile, and will even
attack the crocodile itself. Rats, mice, birds, serpents, and lizards
become its prey; and it will even seize the most poisonous reptiles, and
if bitten by them, it is said to be able to cure itself by the use of
some herb. The Egyptians esteem it so much, that they keep it in their
houses, as we do the cat.




                                THE END.


                  ------------------------------------

                      C. Whittingham, Tooks Court,
                             Chancery Lane.


------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                 TILT’S

                        HANDBOOKS FOR CHILDREN,

                   EACH CONTAINING 48 PRETTY PLATES.

                     _Price 1s. 6d. neatly bound._


                              MRS. CHILD’S
                         LITTLE PICTURE BIBLE.

                              MRS. CHILD’S
                       LITTLE PICTURE TESTAMENT.

                                 MAY’S
                     LITTLE BOOK OF BRITISH BIRDS.

                                 MAY’S
                         LITTLE BOOK OF BRITISH
                              QUADRUPEDS.

                               WILLIAMS’S
                          ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS,
                             REGENT’S PARK.

                               WILLIAMS’S
                           SURREY ZOOLOGICAL
                                GARDENS.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.
    ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.
    ○ Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only
      when a predominant form was found in this book.
    ○ Text that:
      was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).


